


Internet Engineering Task Force                              S. Cheshire
Internet-Draft                                               M. Krochmal
Updates: 1918, 2606                                           Apple Inc.
(if approved)                                                Dec 9, 2011
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: June 11, 2012


                        Special-Use Domain Names
                 draft-cheshire-dnsext-special-names-02

Abstract

   This document describes what it means to say that a DNS name is
   reserved for special use, when reserving such a name is appropriate,
   and the procedure for doing so.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is
   at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 11, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


1.  Introduction

   Certain individual IP addresses and IP address ranges are treated
   specially by network implementations, and consequently are not
   suitable for use as unicast addresses. For example, IPv4 addresses
   224.0.0.0 to 239.255.255.255 are multicast addresses [RFC5735], with
   224.0.0.1 being the "all hosts" multicast address [RFC1112]
   [RFC5771]. Another example is 127.0.0.1, the IPv4 "local host"
   address [RFC5735].

   Analogous to Special-Use IPv4 Addresses [RFC5735], DNS has its own
   concept of reserved names, such as ".example.com.", ".example.net.",
   and ".example.org.", or any name falling under the top level pseudo-
   domain ".invalid." [RFC2606]. However, "Reserved Top Level DNS Names"
   [RFC2606] does not state whether implementations are expected to
   treat such names differently, and if so, in what way.

   This document specifies under what circumstances special treatment is
   appropriate, and in what ways.


2.  Applicability

   When IP multicast was created [RFC1112], implementations had to be
   updated to understand what an IP multicast address means and what to
   do with it. Adding IP multicast to a networking stack entailed more
   than merely adding the right routing table entries for those
   addresses. Moreover, supporting IP multicast entails some level of
   commonality that is consistent across all conformant hosts,
   independent of what networks those hosts may be connected to. While
   it is possible to build a private isolated network using whatever
   valid unicast IP addresses and routing topology you choose
   (regardless of whether those unicast IP addresses are already in use
   by other hosts on the public Internet) the IPv4 multicast address
   224.0.0.1 is always the "all hosts" multicast address, and that's not
   a local decision.

   Similarly, if a domain name has special properties that affect the
   way hardware and software implementations handle the name, which
   apply universally regardless of what network the implementation may
   be connected to, then that may be a candidate for having the IETF
   declare the name to be a Special-Use Domain Name and specify what
   special treatment implementations should give to that name. On the
   other hand, if declaring a given name to be special would result in
   no change to any implementations, then that suggests that the name
   may not be special in any material way, and it may be more
   appropriate to use the existing DNS mechanisms [RFC1034] to provide
   the desired delegation, data, or lack-of-data, for the name in



Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


   question. Where the desired behaviour can be achieved via the
   existing domain name registration processes, that process should be
   used. Reservation of a Special-Use Domain Name is not a mechanism for
   circumventing normal domain name registration processes.

   As an example, suppose there were to be an IETF document specifying
   that a particular name (or set of names) is guaranteed to produce an
   NXDOMAIN ("Name Error" [RFC1035]) result. Such a document falls
   within the responsibilites of the IETF. The IETF is responsible for
   protocol rules. The IETF defines name character set, length limits,
   syntax, the fact that in DNS "A" is equivalent to "a", etc.
   [RFC1034][RFC1035]. Portions of the namespace created by those rules
   are given to ICANN to manage, but due to existing DNS protocol rules
   ICANN is not free to allocate "COM" and "com" to two different name
   servers. The IETF has responsibility for specifying how the DNS
   protocol works, and ICANN is responsible for allocating the names
   made possible by that DNS protocol. Now, suppose a developer were to
   use this special "guaranteed nonexistent" name, "knowing" that it's
   guaranteed to return NXDOMAIN, and suppose also that the user's DNS
   server does not return NXDOMAIN for this name. The developer's
   software then fails. Who do the user and/or developer complain to?
   ICANN? The IETF? The DNS server operator? If the developer can't
   depend on the special "guaranteed nonexistent" name to always return
   NXDOMAIN then the special name is worthless, because it can't be
   relied on to do what it is supposed to. For this special "guaranteed
   nonexistent" name to have any use, it has to be defined to return
   NXDOMAIN, BY PROTOCOL, for all installations, not just by ICANN
   allocation on the public Internet. ICANN has no jurisdiction over how
   users choose to configure their own private DNS servers on their own
   private networks, but developers need a protocol document that says
   that returning answers for the special "guaranteed nonexistent" name
   is a protocol violation on *all* networks, not just the public
   Internet. Hence definition of such a special name would be a higher-
   level protocol rule, above ICANN's management of allocatable names on
   the public Internet.
















Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


3.  Procedure

   If it is determined that special handling of a name is required in
   order to implement some desired new functionality, then an IETF
   "Standards Action" or "IESG Approval" specification [RFC5226] MUST be
   published describing the new functionality, and:

    o The specification needs to state how implementations determine
      that the special handling is required for any given name. This is
      typically done by stating that any fully-qualified domain names
      ending in a certain suffix (i.e. falling within a specified parent
      pseudo-domain) will receive the special behaviour. In effect this
      carves off a sub-tree of the DNS namespace in which the modified
      name treatment rules apply, analogous to how IP multicast
      [RFC1112] or IP link-local addresses [RFC3927] [RFC4862] carve off
      chunks of the IP address space in which their respective modified
      address treatment rules apply.

    o The specification needs to state, in each of the seven categories
      below, what special treatment, if any, is to be applied. If the
      answer in all seven categories is "none", then possibly no special
      treatment is required and requesting reservation of a Special-Use
      Domain Name may not be appropriate.


4.  Domain Name Reservation Considerations

   An IETF "Standards Action" or "IESG Approval" document specifying
   some new naming behaviour, which requires a Special-Use Domain Name
   be reserved to implement this desired new behaviour, needs to contain
   a subsection of the "IANA Considerations" section entitled "Domain
   Name Reservation Considerations" giving answers in the seven
   categories listed below. In the case of algorithmically generated DNS
   names, the specifying document needs to clearly identify the set of
   names generated by the algorithm which would require the proposed
   special treatment.

   1. Users:

      Are human users expected to recognize these names as special and
      use them differently? In what way?

   2. Application Software:

      Are writers of application software expected to make their
      software recognize these names as special and treat them
      differently? In what way? (e.g. if a human users enters such a
      name, should the application software reject it with an error



Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


      message?)

   3. Name Resolution APIs and libraries:

      Are writers of name resolution APIs and libraries expected to make
      their software recognize these names as special and treat them
      differently? If so, how?

   4. Caching DNS Servers:

      Are developers of caching DNS name servers expected to make their
      implementations recognize these names as special and treat them
      differently? If so, how?

   5. Authoritative DNS Servers:

      Are developers of authoritative DNS name servers expected to make
      their implementations recognize these names as special and treat
      them differently? If so, how?

   6. DNS Server Operators:

      Does this reserved Special-Use Domain Name have any potential
      impact on DNS server operators? If they try to configure their
      authoritative DNS server as authoritative for this reserved name
      will compliant name server software reject it as invalid? Do DNS
      server operators need to know about that and understand why? Even
      if the name server software doesn't prevent them from using this
      reserved name, are there other ways that it may not work as
      expected, which the DNS server operator should be aware of?

   7. DNS Registrars:

      How should DNS Registrars treat requests to register this reserved
      domain name? Should such requests be denied? Should such requests
      be allowed, but only to a specially-designated entity? (For
      example, the name "www.example.org" is reserved for documentation
      examples and is not available for registration; however, the name
      is in fact registered; and there is even a web site at that name,
      which states circularly that the name is reserved for use in
      documentation and cannot be registered!)










Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


5.  Initial Registry

   The initial IANA "Special-Use Domain Names" registry shall contain
   entries for the private-address [RFC1918] reverse-mapping domains and
   for the exising Reserved Top Level DNS Names [RFC2606].

5.1.  Domain Name Reservation Considerations for Private Addresses

   The private-address [RFC1918] reverse-mapping domains listed below
   are Special-Use Domain Names:

     10.in-addr.arpa.      21.172.in-addr.arpa.  26.172.in-addr.arpa.
     16.172.in-addr.arpa.  22.172.in-addr.arpa.  27.172.in-addr.arpa.
     17.172.in-addr.arpa.  30.172.in-addr.arpa.  28.172.in-addr.arpa.
     18.172.in-addr.arpa.  23.172.in-addr.arpa.  29.172.in-addr.arpa.
     19.172.in-addr.arpa.  24.172.in-addr.arpa.  31.172.in-addr.arpa.
     20.172.in-addr.arpa.  25.172.in-addr.arpa.  168.192.in-addr.arpa.

   These domains, and any names falling within these domains, are
   special in the following ways:

   1. Users are free to use these names as as they would any other
      reverse-mapping names. However, since there is no central
      authority responsible for use of private addresses, users SHOULD
      be aware that these names are likely to yield different results on
      different networks.

   2. Application software SHOULD NOT recognize these names as special,
      and SHOULD use these names as they would other reverse-mapping
      names.

   3. Name resolution APIs and libraries SHOULD NOT recognize these
      names as special and SHOULD NOT treat them differently. Name
      resolution APIs SHOULD send queries for these names to their
      configured caching DNS server(s).

   4. Caching DNS servers SHOULD recognize these names as special and
      SHOULD NOT, by default, attempt to look up NS records for them, or
      otherwise query authoritative DNS servers in an attempt to resolve
      these names. Instead, caching DNS servers SHOULD by default
      generate immediate (positive or negative) responses for all such
      queries. This is to avoid unnecessary load on the root name
      servers and other name servers. Caching DNS servers SHOULD offer a
      configuration option (disabled by default) to enable upstream
      resolving of such names, for use in private networks where
      private-address reverse-mapping names are known to be handled by
      an upstream DNS server.




Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


   5. Authoritative DNS servers SHOULD recognize these names as special
      and SHOULD by default generate immediate negative responses for
      all such queries, unless explicitly configured by the
      administrator to give positive answers for private-address
      reverse-mapping names.

   6. DNS server operators SHOULD, if they are using private addresses,
      configure their authoritative DNS servers to act as authoritative
      for these names.

   7. DNS Registrars MUST NOT grant requests to register any of these
      names in the normal way to any person or entity. These names are
      reserved for use in private networks, and fall outside the set of
      names available for allocation by registrars. Attempting to
      allocate one of these names as if it were a normal DNS domain name
      will probably not work as desired, for reasons 4, 5 and 6 above.



































Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


5.2.  Domain Name Reservation Considerations for ".test."

   The domain ".test.", and any names falling within ".test.", are
   special in the following ways:

   1. Users are free to use these test names as as they would any other
      domain names. However, since there is no central authority
      responsible for use of test names, users SHOULD be aware that
      these names are likely to yield different results on different
      networks.

   2. Application software SHOULD NOT recognize test names as special,
      and SHOULD use test names as they would other domain names.

   3. Name resolution APIs and libraries SHOULD NOT recognize test names
      as special and SHOULD NOT treat them differently. Name resolution
      APIs SHOULD send queries for test names to their configured
      caching DNS server(s).

   4. Caching DNS servers SHOULD recognize test names as special and
      SHOULD NOT, by default, attempt to look up NS records for them, or
      otherwise query authoritative DNS servers in an attempt to resolve
      test names. Instead, caching DNS servers SHOULD by default
      generate immediate (positive or negative) responses for all such
      queries. This is to avoid unnecessary load on the root name
      servers and other name servers. Caching DNS servers SHOULD offer a
      configuration option (disabled by default) to enable upstream
      resolving of test names, for use in networks where test names are
      known to be handled by an upstream DNS server.

   5. Authoritative DNS servers SHOULD recognize test names as special
      and SHOULD by default generate immediate negative responses for
      all such queries, unless explicitly configured by the
      administrator to give positive answers for test names.

   6. DNS server operators SHOULD, if they are using test names,
      configure their authoritative DNS servers to act as authoritative
      for test names.

   7. DNS Registrars MUST NOT grant requests to register test names in
      the normal way to any person or entity. Test names are reserved
      for use in private networks, and fall outside the set of names
      available for allocation by registrars. Attempting to allocate a
      test name as if it were a normal DNS domain name will probably not
      work as desired, for reasons 4, 5 and 6 above.






Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


5.3.  Domain Name Reservation Considerations for ".localhost."

   The domain ".localhost.", and any names falling within ".localhost.",
   are special in the following ways:

   1. Users are free to use localhost names as as they would any other
      domain names. Users may assume that IPv4 or IPv6 address queries
      for localhost names will always resolve to the respective IP
      loopback address.

   2. Application software MAY recognize localhost names as special, or
      MAY pass them to name resolution APIs as they would for other
      domain names.

   3. Name resolution APIs and libraries SHOULD recognize localhost
      names as special and SHOULD always return the IP loopback address
      for address queries and negative responses for all other query
      types. Name resolution APIs SHOULD NOT send queries for localhost
      names to their configured caching DNS server(s).

   4. Caching DNS servers SHOULD recognize localhost names as special
      and SHOULD NOT attempt to look up NS records for them, or
      otherwise query authoritative DNS servers in an attempt to resolve
      localhost names. Instead, caching DNS servers SHOULD, for all such
      address queries generate an immediate positive response giving the
      IP loopback address, and for all other query types generate an
      immediate negative response. This is to avoid unnecessary load on
      the root name servers and other name servers.

   5. Authoritative DNS servers SHOULD recognize localhost names as
      special handle them as described above for caching DNS servers.

   6. DNS server operators SHOULD be aware that the effective rdata for
      localhost names is defined by protocol specification, and cannot
      be modified by local configuration.

   7. DNS Registrars MUST NOT grant requests to register localhost names
      in the normal way to any person or entity. Localhost names are
      defined by protocol specification, and fall outside the set of
      names available for allocation by registrars. Attempting to
      allocate a localhost name as if it were a normal DNS domain name
      will probably not work as desired, for reasons 2, 3, 4, and 5
      above.








Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


5.4.  Domain Name Reservation Considerations for ".invalid."

   The domain ".invalid.", and any names falling within ".invalid.", are
   special in the ways listed below. In the text below the term
   "invalid" is used in quotes to signify such names, as opposed to
   names that may be invalid for other reasons (e.g. being too long).

   1. Users are free to use "invalid" names as as they would any other
      domain names. Users MAY assume that queries for "invalid" names
      will always return NXDOMAIN responses.

   2. Application software MAY recognize "invalid" names as special, or
      MAY pass them to name resolution APIs as they would for other
      domain names.

   3. Name resolution APIs and libraries SHOULD recognize "invalid"
      names as special and SHOULD always return immediate negative
      responses. Name resolution APIs SHOULD NOT send queries for
      "invalid" names to their configured caching DNS server(s).

   4. Caching DNS servers SHOULD recognize "invalid" names as special
      and SHOULD NOT attempt to look up NS records for them, or
      otherwise query authoritative DNS servers in an attempt to resolve
      "invalid" names. Instead, caching DNS servers SHOULD generate
      immediate NXDOMAIN responses for all such queries. This is to
      avoid unnecessary load on the root name servers and other name
      servers.

   5. Authoritative DNS servers SHOULD recognize "invalid" names as
      special handle them as described above for caching DNS servers.

   6. DNS server operators SHOULD be aware that the effective rdata for
      "invalid" names is defined by protocol specification to be
      nonexistent, and cannot be modified by local configuration.

   7. DNS Registrars MUST NOT grant requests to register "invalid" names
      in the normal way to any person or entity. These "invalid" names
      are defined by protocol specification to be nonexistent, and fall
      outside the set of names available for allocation by registrars.
      Attempting to allocate a "invalid" name as if it were a normal DNS
      domain name will probably not work as desired, for reasons 2, 3,
      4, and 5 above.









Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


5.5.  Domain Name Reservation Considerations for Example Domains

   The domains ".example.", ".example.com.", ".example.net.",
   ".example.org.", and any names falling within those domains, are
   special in the following ways:

   1. Users SHOULD understand that example names are for use in
      documentation only and SHOULD NOT be expected to work with actual
      software on actual networks. Users SHOULD assume that queries for
      example names will always return NXDOMAIN responses.

   2. Application software MAY recognize example names as special, or
      MAY pass them to name resolution APIs as they would for other
      domain names.

   3. Name resolution APIs and libraries SHOULD recognize example names
      as special and SHOULD always return immediate negative responses.
      Name resolution APIs SHOULD NOT send queries for example names to
      their configured caching DNS server(s).

   4. Caching DNS servers SHOULD recognize example names as special and
      SHOULD NOT attempt to look up NS records for them, or otherwise
      query authoritative DNS servers in an attempt to resolve example
      names. Instead, caching DNS servers SHOULD generate immediate
      NXDOMAIN responses for all queries for example names. This is to
      avoid unnecessary load on the root name servers and other name
      servers.

   5. Authoritative DNS servers SHOULD recognize example names as
      special handle them as described above for caching DNS servers.

   6. DNS server operators SHOULD be aware that the effective rdata for
      example names is defined by protocol specification to be
      nonexistent, and cannot be modified by local configuration.

   7. DNS Registrars MUST NOT grant requests to register example names
      in the normal way to any person or entity. Example names are
      defined by protocol specification to be nonexistent, and fall
      outside the set of names available for allocation by registrars.
      Attempting to allocate an example name as if it were a normal DNS
      domain name will probably not work as desired, for reasons 2, 3,
      4, and 5 above.









Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


6.  Security Considerations

   This document outlines the circumstances in which reserving a domain
   name for special-use is appropriate, and the procedure for having
   that Special-Use Domain Name recorded by IANA. Any document
   requesting such a Special-Use Domain Name needs to contain an
   appropriate "Security Considerations" section which describes any
   security issues relevant to that special use.


7.  IANA Considerations

   IANA needs to create a new registry of Special-Use Domain Names,
   initially populated with the private-address reverse-mapping domains
   and the Reserved Top Level DNS Names outlined above in Section 5.

   When IANA receives a request to record a new "Special-Use Domain
   Name" it should verify, in consultation with the IESG, that the IETF
   "Standards Action" or "IESG Approval" document [RFC5226] includes the
   required "Domain Name Reservation Considerations" section stating how
   the special meaning of this name affects the behaviour of hardware,
   software, and humans in the seven categories. If IANA and the IESG
   determine that special handling of this "Special-Use Domain Name" is
   appropriate, IANA should record the Special-Use Domain Name, and a
   reference to the specification that documents, it in the registry.


8.  Informative References

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC1112]  Deering, S., "Host extensions for IP multicasting", STD 5,
              RFC 1112, August 1989.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              BCP 5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC2606]  Eastlake, D. and A. Panitz, "Reserved Top Level DNS
              Names", BCP 32, RFC 2606, June 1999.

   [RFC3927]  Cheshire, S., Aboba, B., and E. Guttman, "Dynamic
              Configuration of IPv4 Link-Local Addresses", RFC 3927,
              May 2005.



Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Special-Use Domain Names                Dec 2011


   [RFC4862]  Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5735]  Cotton, M. and L. Vegoda, "Special Use IPv4 Addresses",
              BCP 153, RFC 5735, January 2010.

   [RFC5771]  Cotton, M., Vegoda, L., and D. Meyer, "IANA Guidelines for
              IPv4 Multicast Address Assignments", BCP 51, RFC 5771,
              March 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Stuart Cheshire
   Apple Inc.
   1 Infinite Loop
   Cupertino, California  95014
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 974 3207
   Email: cheshire@apple.com


   Marc Krochmal
   Apple Inc.
   1 Infinite Loop
   Cupertino, California  95014
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 974 4368
   Email: marc@apple.com
















Cheshire & Krochmal       Expires June 11, 2012                [Page 13]

